Done with Query Page:0, PageSize:5

Article Data
['article', 'news']
['Technology']
BBC
https://www.bbc.com/news/articles/cj6e6zzwnllo
None
2024-10-22T15:52:09.135Z
Trump has the world’s richest man on his side. What does Musk want?
Zander Mundy was midway through a typical day at his office when he heard the news: tech billionaire Elon Musk was speaking at a nearby school in the town of Folsom, in the US state of Pennsylvania. "When is the richest guy in the world in town often?" Mr Mundy remembers thinking to himself. With a population of just under 9,000 people, Folsom is a quiet place. Residents typically shy away from speaking openly about their politics, and political yard signs are few and far between. The 21-year-old Mr Mundy, who works at a leasing agent at an apartment complex, admits that he wasn't planning on voting in the November election. But once he saw crowds forming - and felt the excitement - he decided to go in, eager to hear from Musk. By the time he left the school, he recalls leaning more towards Donald Trump than towards Kamala Harris. "[If] someone like that tells you this is the election that's going to decide our future, not only who's president for the next four years but what the world world is going to be like... I think that's pretty huge," he told the BBC. "That matters. That's significant." Musk, who previously cultivated an image as an eccentric tech genius who was only on the sidelines of politics, has now pledged full allegiance to Trump. In full view of the American public, the 53-year-old has invested his time, operational know-how and ample pocketbook into trying to get the Republican elected - a rarity among the nation's business elite who traditionally prefer to influence politics from behind the scenes.It's an approach that is starkly different to traditional CEOs, many of whom have been better known for holding expensive, exclusive fundraising dinners or hosting potential donors at lavish homes in the Hamptons. And it's prompted observers to ask questions about Mr Musk's motivations.Follow live updates from the US campaign trailElection polls - is Harris or Trump ahead?The traditional approach by CEOs is "not out in the public spotlight," explains Erik Gordon, chair of the entrepreneurship department at the University of Michigan's Ross School of Business. But "Musk does it loudly and proudly, and, therefore, perhaps makes himself a lightning rod". Musk's Trump-supporting political action committee - America PAC - has already spent more than $119m (£91.6m) this election cycle, according to Open Secrets, a non-profit tracker. Additionally, Musk's own contributions make him one of the largest individual donors in the presidential race, and reportedly play a vital role in Trump's door-knocking and ground operation in key swing states in which the campaign hopes to mobilise voters. Steve Davis, a key lieutenant of Musk's who has worked for his companies including SpaceX, X and the Boring Company, has reportedly been recruited to help in the effort. 
Mr Musk's personal investment into the campaign is something that was quickly noticed by Mr Mundy. "That alone was shocking to me," he said. "That someone would really spend that much time and money to influence voters. That means he's doing it for a reason." Some Democrats, like Pennsylvania Senator John Fetterman, have been urging their party to not ignore the threat Mr Musk poses ahead of the election. Mr Musk appeals to a demographic of people who see him as "undeniably brilliant" and among whom traditional Democratic outreach efforts have proven difficult, Fetterman believes. Why Trump is courting old friends from the WWEAre Elon Musk's election giveaways legal?Since first endorsing Trump in the wake of the assassination attempt in Butler, Pennsylvania, on 13 July, Mr Musk has become a common fixture on the campaign trail, where he often delivers warnings that only Trump can "save" American democracy. In the closing days of the race, Mr Musk has criss-crossed the state of Pennsylvania, a key battleground state that has become a focus for Trump and Kamala Harris alike. America PAC is now doling out $1m a day until election day to one random voter - no matter their party affiliation - provided they have registered to vote and sign a petition. At "town hall" events in Harrisburg and Pittsburgh over the weekend, for example, Mr Musk presented giant lottery-style cheques to winners, with enthusiastic crowds chanting "Elon". He responded by telling the crowd that their energy "lights a fire" in his soul.At a rally in Philadelphia on Monday, Congresswoman Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez said Mr Musk was “dangling a million bucks to many of us who are struggling to make ends meet, if they dance for him".“Elon Musk thinks that dangling money in front of a working person is a cute thing to do when the election of our lives is before us because that’s what people and billionaires like that do," she added.Some observers, however, have questioned his motivation and have suggested that Mr Musk and his businesses stand to benefit from a relationship with Trump. Among those observers is Matt Teske, the CEO of electric vehicle charging platform Chargeway. According to Mr Teske, Mr Musk's political shift has been difficult for many in the electric vehicle industry, but comes as no surprise after several years of becoming increasingly active in politics. "I think Musk's interests are focused, predominantly, around a handful of things that are important to him related to his businesses, [with] regulation being something he's voiced concerns around," Mr Tesks says. He notes that Mr Musk "pushed back heavily" on restrictions implemented during the Covid-19 pandemic in California. 
The University of Michigan's Professor Gordon agrees. He says Mr Musk sees himself as a someone who has been held back by regulators, and feels that government intervention has stifled the development of the technologies he is focused on, such as autonomous driving. "He wants to be sort of on the frontier, [a] wild and woolly entrepreneur who can break new paths and not be bogged down by regulation, which tends to fall five, 10, 20 years behind advances in technology," Prof Gordon says. "Musk wants to go the other way," he adds. "He wants to go to Mars."If he wins in November, Donald Trump has suggested that Mr Musk could oversee "cost cutting" in the US government. Even if he doesn't do that exact job, Mr Musk would have Trump's ear thanks to his support during the campaign, observers believe, and he could have a strong influence on the administration's decision-making. Mr Musk, for his part, has said he would be open to the idea of leading a "department of government efficiency" to end regulation's "strangulation" of the US. That position, Democrats say, could present a complex conflict of interest, given the billions in government contracts Mr Musk has received for SpaceX and Tesla. "That's kind of deeply both unethical and illegal," says Lenny Mendonca, California Governor Gavin Newsom's former chief economic and business adviser. Mendonca believes that those with intertwined government and regulatory relationships "can have a voice" but should not be in a position of authority over those same interests. Lawrence Noble, a former general counsel at the Federal Election Commission, has questioned the legality of Mr Musk's giveaways in the election cycle. Mr Noble believes that this form of campaigning should concern Americans who value safe work environments and consumer protections. “We know what companies do when left to their own devices. They put profit and stockholder value and CEO compensation above safety, and they kind of write off the safety issues as a cost of doing business,” he tells the BBC. "It's dangerous to have somebody who views business that way, and views government that way, in charge of safety," he adds. For Mr Musk -  who relishes being a "disrupter" and renegade - there's little question that his lucrative relationships with the US government will continue, no matter the result of the November election. But his brand, and his reputation, are now tied to Donald Trump's - and his actions suggest he knows it. Additional reporting by Pratiksha Ghildial
SIMPLE GUIDE: How to win a US electionEXPLAINER: What Harris or Trump would do in powerGLOBAL: Harris or Trump? What Chinese people want ON THE GROUND: Democrats take fight deep into Trump countryFACT-CHECK: What the numbers really say about crimePOLLS: Who is winning the race for the White House?
North America correspondent Anthony Zurcher makes sense of the race for the White House in his twice weekly US Election Unspun newsletter. Readers in the UK can sign up here. Those outside the UK can sign up here.

Article Data
['article', 'news']
['Technology']
BBC
https://www.bbc.com/news/articles/c70w0ne4zexo
None
2024-10-22T15:09:56.790Z
UK regulator: Clear link between online posts and violent disorder 
There was a "clear connection" between the violent disorder in England and Northern Ireland in the summer and posts on social media and messaging apps, Ofcom has concluded.The government had asked the media regulator to consider how illegal content and disinformation spread during the unrest.In an open letter setting out its findings, Ofcom boss Dame Melanie Dawes said such content spread "widely and quickly" online following the stabbings in Southport, in July, which preceded the disorder.She added most online services took "rapid action", but said the responses of some firms were "uneven"."Posts about the Southport incident and subsequent events from high-profile accounts reached millions of users, demonstrating the role that virality and algorithmic recommendations can play in driving divisive narratives in a crisis period," Dame Melanie wrote.Experts say it shows the power - and responsibility - social media platforms have.“Ofcom is saying that social media posts inciting riots are not just words - they play a big part in fanning the flames of disorder," said Rashik Parmar, from BCS, the Chartered Institute for IT.“There should be accountability where platforms allow dangerously divisive content to go unchecked," he added.Media analyst Hanna Kahlert, at Midia Research, said Ofcom's findings amounted to a "call for social platforms to take greater ownership of the impact of content."
At the time of the unrest, Ofcom faced criticism for not doing more to rein in the spread of untrue and inflammatory content.It urged tech firms to take action - but also pointed out the enhanced powers it is due to get under the Online Safety Act had not yet come into force.The act will see the creation of codes of practice for big tech firms which will place new responsibilities on them for tackling disinformation."I am confident that, had the draft Codes been in force at the time, they would have provided a firm basis for urgent engagement with services on the steps they were taking to protect UK users from harm," Dame Melanie wrote.She said the new powers set "clear standards" for what Ofcom would expect to see in future from big tech firms, such as:Specifying in their terms of service provisions how individuals are to be protected from priority illegal contentHaving systems designed to swiftly take down illegal content and having "adequately resourced" content moderation teams Providing effective and accessible mechanisms for users to complain about illegal content, including on messaging platforms
The unrest which broke out in August 2024 was the worst that had been seen in the UK for a decade.It was followed by waves of arrests and prosecutions, some for online offences. The role that big tech played was subject to much scrutiny - though the platforms themselves remained largely silent.The prime minister also got dragged into a war of words with one of the highest profile people in tech - X owner Elon Musk.The tech billionaire suggested that "civil war is inevitable" following the disorder.Sir Keir Starmer hit back saying there was "no justification" for Mr Musk's comments, adding there was more that social media companies "can and should be doing".

Article Data
['article', 'news']
['Technology']
BBC
https://www.bbc.com/news/articles/cg565mrdz7zo
None
2024-10-22T11:03:44.272Z
Facebook and Instagram launch celebrity scam ad crackdown
Facebook and Instagram owner Meta is to introduce facial recognition technology to try and crack down on scammers who fraudulently use celebrities in adverts.Elon Musk and personal finance expert, Martin Lewis, are among those to fall victim to such scams, which typically promote investment schemes and crypto-currencies.Mr Lewis previously told the Today programme, on BBC Radio 4, that he receives "countless" reports of his name and face being used in such scams every day, and had been left feeling "sick" by them.Meta already uses an ad review system which uses artificial intelligence (AI) to detect fake celebrity endorsements but is now seeking to beef it up with facial recognition tech.It will work by comparing images from ads flagged as being dubious with celebrities' Facebook or Instagram profile photos.If the image is a confirmed to be a match, and the ad a scam, it will be automatically deleted.Meta said "early testing" of the system had shown "promising results" so it would now start showing in-app notifications to a larger group of public figures who had been impacted by so-called "celeb-bait."
The problem of celebrity scams has been a long-running one for Meta.It became so significant in the 2010s that Mr Lewis took legal action against Facebook, but he ultimately dropped the case when the tech giant agreed to introduce a button so people could report scam ads. In addition to introducing the button, Facebook also agreed to donate £3m to Citizens Advice.But, since then, the scams have become more complex and significantly more believable.They are increasingly powered by so-called deepfake technology, where a realistic computer-generated likeness or video is used to make it seem like the celebrity is backing a product or service.Meta has faced pressure to do something about the growing threat of these ads.On Sunday, Mr Lewis urged the government to give the UK regulator, Ofcom, more powers to tackle scam ads after a fake interview with Chancellor Rachel Reeves was used to trick people into giving away their bank details."Scammers are relentless and continuously evolve their tactics to try to evade detection," Meta acknowledged."We hope that by sharing our approach, we can help inform our industry’s defences against online scammers," it added.
Meta has also announced it will also use facial recognition tech to help people who find themselves locked out of their social media.Currently, unlocking Instagram or Facebook accounts involves uploading official ID or documents.But now video selfies and face recognition is being tested as a way to prove who a person is and and regain access more quickly.The material provided by the user will be checked against the account's profile image to see if it is a match.However, the widespread use of facial recognition is controversial - Facebook has previously used it, before ditching it in 2021 over privacy, accuracy and bias concerns.It now says that the video selfies will be encrypted and stored securely, and won't be shown publicly. Facial data generated in making the comparison will be deleted after the check.But the system will not be initially offered in areas where permission from regulators has not yet been obtained, including the UK and EU.

Article Data
['article', 'features']
['Future']
BBC
https://www.bbc.com/future/article/20241018-ai-art-the-end-of-creativity-or-a-new-movement
None
2024-10-21T11:07:28.320Z
The AI art redefining creativity
Artificial intelligence is being used to generate paintings, images and even sculptures, with some selling for thousands of dollars. Do we need to reframe our definition of art?
In the drawing room of a stately home in rural Oxfordshire, I watch on as a dungaree-clad artist slowly and deliberately puts pen to paper. Her arm moves across the canvas, the marks gradually coalescing into an abstract portrait of herself.
It seems like a moment of creative expression. But this is no ordinary artist – she is the world's first humanoid robot artist, Ai-Da. By design, her very existence brings into question how we define art, and who, or in this case, what, can create it.
Will AI algorithms and robots like Ai-Da spell the end of human creativity and artistry, or can they be harnessed to augment our own creative potential?
Art in flux
When Marcel Duchamp proposed that a porcelain urinal be considered art and submitted it for exhibition in early 20th-Century New York, he flipped the art world on its head. He argued that anything could be considered as art, if chosen by the artist and labelled as such. It was a profoundly revolutionary thought which challenged previous notions of art as beautiful, technically skilful and emotive.
In much the same way, AI-created artworks are disrupting the accepted norms of the art world. As philosopher Alice Helliwell from Northeastern University London argues, if we can consider radical and divergent pieces like Duchamp's urinal and Tracey Emin's bed as art proper, how can something created by a generative algorithm be dismissed? After all, both were controversial at the time and contain objects that haven't technically been created by an "artist's" hand.
"Historically, the way we understand the definition of art has shifted," says Heliwell. "It is hard to see why a urinal can be art, but art made by a generative algorithm could not be."
Throughout history, every radical artistic movement has been intimately connected to the cultural zeitgeist of the time, a reflection of society's preoccupations and concerns, like Turner and his industrial landscapes and Da Vinci's obsession with science and mathematics. AI is no different. Ai-Da's creators, gallerist Aidan Meller and researcher Lucy Seal cite this as a pivotal reason for the existence of a humanoid artist like Ai-Da. She is the personification of one of contemporary society's current fears, the rise of job-snatching AI algorithms and potential robot domination.
But technological revolutions like artificial intelligence need not signify the "end of art" as many fear. Instead, they can help to kickstart an artistic metamorphosis and move us towards totally different ways of seeing and creating, something Marcus du Sautoy, a mathematician at the University of Oxford and author of The Creativity Code: Art and Innovation in the Age of AI, would contend.
Humans are just as prone to behaving like machines, repeating old behaviours and getting bogged down with rules, like a painter or musician locked into a particular style. "AI might help us to stop behaving like machines…and kick us into being creative again as humans," says du Sautoy. He sees it as a powerful collaborator in the pursuit of human creativity.
There is historical precedence for new technology liberating us from our creative shackles. Take the invention of photography in the 1800s for example. Some artists saw the camera as the antithesis of an artist, and photographs as the mortal enemy of the art establishment.
But instead of replacing painting, photography became a catalyst in the development of the experimental modern art movement of the 20th Century, as artists moved away from realism towards abstraction, a shift that paved the way for the contemporary art of today.
Who's the artist?
Walking around Ai-Da's country pile in Oxfordshire I got to appreciate the sheer breadth of her artworks to-date. Unsettling busts of herself with her eyes stapled shut, scarab beetles fused to her face; partial and ethereal depictions of computer scientist Alan Turing; and colourful pop-art inspired portraits of Glastonbury headliners. 
Unlike the numerous text-to-image generators like Dall-E and Midjourney that have the ability to create alarmingly plausible magazine front covers and win coveted art competitions, Ai-Da's artistic process doesn't rely solely upon the data on which she has been trained. (Find out more about AI training in this simple guide to machine learning.)
Ai-Da also makes use of the cameras in her eyes, which feed novel images into her algorithm, thereby creating new and unique works far removed from human-generated datasets. This is how she's able to create self-portraiture. Does this make her creative in her own right? And can we credit her with authorship, or does this reside with the artists upon whose work she's been trained and with the creators of her algorithm, who ultimately wrote her code?
Margaret Boden, a researcher in cognitive science at the University of Sussex in the UK, has developed one of the most widely accepted definitions of creativity to date. She sees it as the ability to generate ideas that are new, valuable and surprising. Using this definition, the works produced by machines like Ai-Da could be considered creative, argue her creators. Whether or not an algorithm or a robot itself can be described as a creative entity, an 'artist' in its own right, like a human, remains up for debate, and this in part comes down to authorship. 
Questions of authorship and data ownership plague the artificial intelligence narrative. Artists Holly Herndon and Mat Dryhurst, who recently held an exhibition exploring collaborative artwork in the age of AI at London's Serpentine Gallery, want to confront the issue of data misuse and authorship in AI. The pair co-founded Spawning AI, a suite of tools aimed at empowering human creators to both prohibit AI from using their works and to find whether works of theirs have already been referenced in AI generated work.
Plagiarism is a legitimate concern for many artists as their work is used to train algorithms but also can then be copied in the works that generative AI tools produce.
But there are also artists who see AI as a new outlet for their own creativity – a fresh medium they can wield much like a brush or palette knife. Some artists, such as Sougwen Chung, are now exclusively training algorithms on their works alone in an attempt to push their own creative boundaries.
There is another argument at the heart of this issue too. The machine-learning processes used to train generative AI algorithms may be a creative process in themselves.
"Code exposed to data – existing artworks, for example – is able to learn, mutate and evolve," says du Sautoy. "It means that the code by the end of this learning process is very different from the original code written by the human. This means that there is a chance for the code to produce something that... deserves to be called the creativity of the code rather than the human who started the process.
"It's a bit like Picasso is made from the DNA of his parents but it is his learning and exposure to the world that resulted in his creativity. You would never credit that to the parents even though everything started with their code or DNA." (Learn more about machine learning and some of the other terms you need to understand AI better.)
Powerful algorithms called Creative Adversarial Networks (Cans) also now exist, designed to deliberately create something that goes against the patterns in the training data, breaking with the style of the art upon which it's been trained. This is leading to AIs that generate very surprising results. "Many machine learning algorithms are 'black boxes'," says Helliwell. "We do not fully know what is happening inside the system, even if we have designed it ourselves."
This is a common and unsettling problem throughout the AI world. How can we trust the decisions or outputs from an AI if we don't understand how it got there in the first place? (Read more about why humans may never understand AI.)
Is art uniquely human?
The prospect of truly artistic machines is also challenging another long-held belief about what makes us human. Art has long been seen as a uniquely human endeavour. Made by humans, for aesthetic appreciation by other humans, artworks themselves are imbued with the emotions of their creators. It is a visual representation of their desires and fears, frustrations and reverence, or at the very least their need to create for practical, economical and emotional reasons.
So, can we consider the creations of non-human entities to be art by the same definition? There are some who believe that animals already produce forms of art. And research has shown that pigeons seem to be able to discriminate between different types of artwork.
It all comes down to intent, this is "what truly distinguishes the creativity of the human and the machine", says du Sautoy. "No machine is driven to express itself creatively. It is prompted by the intention of the human."
Does this mean AI is not yet fully capable of creating true art? After all, computer algorithms lack any real-world experience and robots like Ai-Da, although capable of self-portraiture, don't actually possess self-awareness. This question remains hotly contested. For Helliwell a lack of intent shouldn't necessarily preclude AI works from being considered art.
More like this:
And perhaps that is what it comes down to. Art, goes the idiom, is in the eye of the beholder. As humans, for example, we identify patterns and admire the artistry evident in the natural world – the intricate web of a spider, the decorative plumage of a peacock. We often refer to bird calls as music and the mating displays of some animals as dance. There are numerous examples of animals exhibiting creative behaviours that we might label artistic. The Bower bird and pufferfish play with perspective, symmetry and colour in much the same way a human artist might, for example. And while these animals may not necessarily be intentionally creating these to be enjoyed as works of art, their actions are no less intentional in their pursuit of attracting a mate or warding off competitors.
What's the future?
However we look to define art or the artist, it's clear that AI algorithms and machines like Ai-Da are having an impact on the art world. Their works are exhibited alongside more traditional forms of art in established art institutions worldwide. Next year we'll see the world's first AI art gallery open its doors in LA, a permanent exhibition space for "ethical AI".
Eva Jäger, the creative AI lead and arts technologies curator at the Serpentine Gallery in London, is also helping to bring AI art to the masses, with a programme of exhibitions provoking critical discussion about the impact of technology on art.
For her, the future of AI art is not adversarial. Traditional forms of art will continue to exist, just as AI artwork will continue to develop. She sees the collaboration between human and machine as a space for real creative potential. She believes that the artist's intent and the human practice behind a piece or installation which utilises technology like AI are more important than just the final aesthetics.
"For me there are some really interesting generative images that get produced, but without the practice behind it I'm not sold on them, just because they're an amazing image," she says. "And I would say the same about painting. I’m much more interested in the systems, including the humans behind the work. I want to know what they are using the system for, what are they exploring? It's a mistake just to look at the final artefact."
And when it comes to evaluating the authenticity and credibility of AI art, one of the most contentious aspects of the AI art discipline, du Sautoy makes a compelling point. All art is a product of that which came before it, and creativity cannot come from nothing – all artists whether human, robot or algorithm, build upon the works of others.
"Too many people discuss creativity as if it is some uniquely human magical process, that it conjures something from nothing like a magician," says du Sautoy. "But that is just because we don't understand our own creativity."
-- 
For more technology news and insights, sign up to our Tech Decoded newsletter, while The Essential List delivers a handpicked selection of features and insights to your inbox twice a week.
For more science, technology and health stories from the BBC, follow us on Facebook and X.

Article Data
['article', 'features']
['Future']
BBC
https://www.bbc.com/future/article/20241018-barcodes-at-75-how-black-and-white-lines-went-into-space-and-stoked-fears-of-the-antichrist
None
2024-10-20T09:01:31.263Z
The weird history of barcodes
Few people think twice about the barcodes on their shopping, but in the 75 years since they were first dreamed up, they have helped save lives, gone into space and stoked fears of the Antichrist.
Lasers. That's what supermarket staff need, insisted Paul McEnroe. Scanners in the checkout and little pistol-shaped laser guns, too. Point, shoot, sell!
In 1969, it was an outlandish vision of the future: these lasers would scan weird little black-and-white markings on products that McEnroe and his colleagues at IBM had designed. It would speed up supermarket queues, he enthused. The solution would come to be known as the barcode.
At this point in history barcodes had never been used commercially – though the idea had been brewing for decades following a patent filed on 20 October 1949 by one of the engineers who was now part of McEnroe's team. The IBM engineers were trying to bring barcodes to life. They had a vision of the future where shoppers whizzed through the checkout with lasers scanning every item they wanted to purchase. But IBM's lawyers had a problem with the future.
"No way," they said, according to McEnroe, a now-retired engineer. Their fear was "laser suicide". What if people intentionally injured their eyes with the scanners and then sued IBM? What if supermarket staff went blind?
No, no, this was a mere half-milliwatt laser beam, McEnroe tried to explain. There was 12,000 times more energy in a 60-watt lightbulb. His pleas fell flat. And so he turned to Rhesus monkeys imported from Africa, though now he can't remember how many. "I think it was six," he says. "I couldn't swear to that." After tests at a nearby laboratory proved that exposure to the tiny laser did not harm the animals' eyes, the lawyers relented.
And that is how the scanning of barcodes became commonplace in supermarkets across the US, and ultimately the entire world.
In an unexpected twist, the laboratory used by McEnroe subsequently told him it would be sending him the monkeys. They were his problem now. "It was crazy," he recalls, laughing. "I found a zoo in North Carolina."
Alongside the monkeys, each human member of McEnroe's team at IBM also deserves credit for the Universal Product Code (UPC), as their version of the barcode became formally known. Among their number was Joe Woodland, the engineer who dreamed up the early concept behind barcodes decades earlier, after drawing lines in the sand on a beach. It was he and another engineer who made the application to patent the fundamental idea for barcodes back in October 1949.
Crucially, George Laurer and other members of the IBM team then took this pre-existing proposal for barcode-style markings and developed them into a neat rectangle of black, vertical lines corresponding to a number that could uniquely identify any supermarket item imaginable. From tins of soup to boxes of cereal or packets of spaghetti. The grocery industry formally adopted the UPC in 1973 and the first product bearing one was scanned at Marsh Supermarket in Ohio in 1974. From there, it conquered the planet.
Other kinds of barcode soon followed and the UPC also laid the foundations for so-called "2D barcodes" such as QR codes, which can encode even more information. But the history of these little black-and-white markings is far wilder and rockier than you would ever imagine.
You could even argue that it began with the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA).
"I was scanning things for the CIA," explains McEnroe. "Great big maps." That was one of his first jobs at IBM, involving image scanners. As he explains in his book about the invention of the UPC barcode, this helped to prepare him for working on completely new, but related, technology that would revolutionise the retail industry.
McEnroe knew that checkout lines in stores would move much more quickly if staff could just scan products into a computer rather than having to read the prices stamped on each item and then manually process the sale. To be accepted, such a code-scanning system would have to work pretty much every time – and read the code correctly even if the product was pulled across the scanner at speeds of up to 100 inches per second (2.5m/s).
The IBM team set to work, drawing on the design patented by Woodland and his colleague – however, with an important difference. The original approach relied on reading the thickness of the black lines. One of the concepts they had proposed in the patent – a round, bulls-eye style barcode formed of concentric circles – had even been developed by a competing group. But this had proven difficult to print and even harder to fit neatly onto product packaging.
The IBM team worked out that it was easier to print vertical lines and base the scanning process not on measuring the thickness of those lines but rather the distance between the leading edge of one line and the leading edge of the line next to it. In other words, the space between the lines, which was more reflective and easier to pick up by the scanner. That way, it didn't matter if the label printer had too much ink and drew lines that were thicker than intended – the scan would still work, pretty much every time.
While the first barcode-branded product was sold in a US supermarket in 1974, it took another five years for barcodes to reach British supermarkets. As soon as they did, the first item to be scanned there was a box of teabags.
McEnroe stresses that the launch of UPC barcode technology was not without controversy. "Our first store didn't open," he recalls. There were people outside protesting the fact that prices would no longer be stamped on every product, merely on the shelves where products were placed in-store.
Some labour unions at the time felt – ultimately, correctly – that scanning technology threatened certain supermarket jobs. There were also concerns that barcodes could be used to obfuscate prices. McEnroe himself remembers how, in the past, shoppers sometimes searched for aging items in a supermarket since those ones might still have an older, lower price stamped on them. If barcodes took over, opportunities for such bargain-hunting would disappear.
These worries soon fizzled out. But barcodes have always upset some people.
To a fanatical few, they are nothing short of evil. In 2023, Jordan Frith, a professor of communication at Clemson University in South Carolina, published a book about the history of barcodes. During his research, he found a 1975 article in a publication called Gospel Call that suggested barcodes could be "the Mark of the Beast" – a reference to a biblical prophecy from the Book of Revelation about the end of the world. The New Testament passage in question refers to a beast – sometimes interpreted as the Antichrist – that forces every person to be marked on their right hand or forehead. In the prophecy, only those who accept such a mark are allowed to buy or sell.
The 1975 article suggested that, eventually, barcodes would be "laser tattooed" onto everybody's forehead or the back of their hand, ready for presentation at supermarket checkouts. 
Although bizarre, the idea has proved surprisingly sticky. A 1982 book called The New Money System by evangelical writer Mary Stewart Relfe further popularised the supposed connection between UPC barcodes and the Mark of the Beast after she claimed the number 666 was "hidden" within the lines at either end and the middle of each barcode.
In fact, these "guard lines", as they are known, serve as a reference point to help the laser scanner pick out the start and end of each UPC sequence. Laurer in the IBM team, considered co-inventor of the UPC, later insisted there was nothing sinister about this and the resemblance to the pattern used to encode the number six was a coincidence.
But the bizarre theory can still be found in certain corners of the Internet. And some even take extreme steps to avoid barcodes, including members of an orthodox Russian Christian group known as Old Believers. One such Old Believer, Agafia Lykov, who lives in an especially remote part of Siberia, told visiting journalists from Vice in 2013 that barcodes were "the stamp of the Antichrist". She added that if anyone gives her something, such as a packet of seeds, with a barcode on it, she takes the contents out and burns the packet.
Plus, in 2014, a Russian dairy company posted a statement on its website explaining why there was a red cross printed over the barcodes on its cartons of milk. Because, as is "well known", the statement read, barcodes are the Mark of the Beast. The statement has since been removed from the company's website.
McEnroe says he is aware of some of these strange beliefs around barcodes. "It's not something I would be prone to think," he says, rather diplomatically. Frith makes another point: "It's kind of strange to imagine a bunch of grocery executives leading the way for the apocalypse."
And yet there is, arguably, something strangely dystopian about barcodes. For some, they have become symbols of capitalism in its coldest form. They also often turn up in chilling sequences in movies. In The Terminator, we learn that prisoners of killer robots in an apocalyptic future receive barcode markings on their arms for identification. "This is burned in by laser scan," time-travelling protagonist Kyle Reese explains to a terrified Sarah Connor. "Some of us were kept alive to work – loading bodies." The barcode marking, in this context, has echoes of the numbers tattooed on the arms of Nazi concentration camp prisoners during the Second World War.
Sometimes people do use barcodes malevolently. Especially when it comes to QR codes, which rather than using vertical lines consist of constellations of tiny black and white squares in a pattern that is readable by digital smartphone cameras.
Because scanning a QR code with your phone can direct your device to a malicious website, for example, QR codes have occasionally been deployed by hackers. The UK's National Cyber Security Centre has warned members of the public to be wary about QR codes. Drivers in several English towns have also been warned about a scam where fake QR codes were stuck to car parking machines in an attempt to steal money from unwitting motorists. One code used in car parks in Leicester was even linked to Russia.
And, in September, Lebanon-based armed group Hezbollah accused Israel of dropping leaflets containing a dangerous barcode, referred to in some reports as a QR code, that could "withdraw all information" from any device used to scan it. The BBC has not been able to verify these claims.
Despite some nefarious uses of barcodes, and outlandish claims that they represent the Mark of the Beast, these markings now underpin thousands of industrial and commercial processes all over the world. An estimated 10 billion barcodes are scanned globally, every day, according to GS1, the organisation that oversees UPC and QR code standards.
You might have noticed the barcodes and QR codes on the packaging of items you receive in the post, for example. A single packet can be scanned many times on its journey from warehouse to you, says Frith. And because barcodes allow retailers to keep track of huge product inventories, that means these businesses can operate giant stores with relatively few staff. "You wouldn't have these superstores or anything like that without barcodes," says Frith. "It's changed the physical shape of retail."
Erin Temmen, an account manager at labelling firm Electronic Imaging Materials, agrees with this assessment. Her company, like some others in the industry, produce barcode labels that will work in practically any environment. This includes cold-resistant labels that won't fall off equipment filled with liquid nitrogen, for example. And chemical-resistant labels that will retain their barcode even if they get splashed with nasty substances in a laboratory. The firm also produces extra reflective barcode labels. "That increases the scan distance," says Temmen. It makes it easier for hurried workers to scan the code at a distance of up to 45ft (14m), making it detectable even if the barcode is on an item placed high on a shelf, for example.
Such versatility hints at the wide variety of contexts in which barcodes are actually used. They have helped to track the behaviour and movement of honeybees and songbirds, tagged eggs and embryos in fertility clinics to avoid mix-ups, and been placed on gravestones to direct visitors to online memorials for the deceased.
The US military also uses barcodes to help it track the attendance and training of personnel. One University in Saudi Arabia also piloted using barcodes to record student attendance at lectures.
Barcodes have even made it into space. Astronauts on the International Space Station use barcode scanners to identify equipment and mechanical parts, although they have largely been replaced with radio frequency (RFID) tags now. Barcodes are also employed to log the food and beverage intake by astronauts, as well as to identify their blood, saliva and urine samples.
Back on Earth, it's possible that barcodes have saved lives. Hospitals use barcoding systems to track blood samples, drugs and medical devices such as hip replacements. The UK's National Health Service (NHS) has a Scan4Safety programme, to promote the use of barcodes for tracking such things. Machine-assisted identification can help staff ensure clinicians administer the correct drug to the correct patient, for example.
According to a report on Scan4Safety, the introduction of this technology has freed up 140,000 hours of staff time for patient care that would otherwise have been spent performing administrative tasks and inventory checks. It claims barcode scanning has also saved the health service millions of pounds.
"I speak with clinicians and members of staff in hospitals responsible for managing inventory – they all report benefits," says Valentina Lichtner, a senior lecturer of digital health and decision making at Leeds University Business School. She is currently researching the impact of barcode tracking systems in healthcare settings. 
And in a world where barcodes are pretty much everywhere, it's possible to design interesting games and experiences around them. One of the most inventive examples was Skannerz, an early 2000s handheld video game that had an integrated a barcode scanner into the device. Players were required to scan random barcodes on groceries, for example, until they found a code that happened to trigger the "capture" of an alien monster in the game – something that has strong echoes of the Pokemon games. Other games – including Japan's Barcode Battler – have also relied on getting players to scan barcodes as part of the "fun".
None of this would have been possible without Woodland's lines in the sand and the work of McEnroe and his team at IBM. Currently, there is a push – called Sunrise 2027 – to get retailers to adopt QR-style codes, over the older, vertical line-based designs. This would allow them to encode more information – such as use-by-dates on food packaging or instructions for how to use a certain cleaning product. But Frith says he thinks the traditional barcode will likely stick around for a long time to come. It is a deceptively simple technology that has, he says, impacted countless industries.
And yet, despite being everywhere, most people wouldn't give barcodes a second thought. "The biggest testament to their success," says Frith, "is that we never think about them."
--
For more technology news and insights, sign up to our Tech Decoded newsletter, while The Essential List delivers a handpicked selection of features and insights to your inbox twice a week.
For more science, technology and health stories from the BBC, follow us on Facebook and X.

